---
title: "Types of Income"
keywords: income, property, office, employment, business
tags: []
sidebar: tax_basics_sidebar
permalink: property_business_employment_income.html
summary: Taxpayers in Canada can earn income from employment, property and business. Each type of income is taxed differently and is therefore important to identify.
---

In Canada, individuals and corporations are liable to pay tax on their income. Income can be earned from one or more of the following three sources:

1. *Employment* - includes activitites performed by an individual in the service of another person.[^employment]
2. *Business* - includes any activity performed in order to earn income other than employment activities.[^business]
3. *Property* - includes money, real property and any right of any kind whatever.[^property]

It is important to determine the source of income earned in the year because each are taxed differently. 

# Determining The Source of Income #

## Employment Income ##

Employment income makes up the majority of income for most individuals. If you earn a steady paycheck from someone for services performed then you likely are earning employment income. However, there are cases where you may be considered an independant contractor. In this case you would be earning business income rather than employment income. You can read more about the difference in our analysis of the difference between being an employee and an independant contactor.

Income from employment includes salaries and most benefits received by virtue of employment. We have a detailed section of this textbook outlining how to calculate employment income. However, if you are an employee of a company you will receive a T4 slip from your employer that includes you income from employment.

## Property Income ##

Property income is generally passive income earned by virtue of owning property. For example, dividends and interest earning on money saved for retirement would be considered property income. Rental income from renting out real estate would also generally be considered property income. 

It should be noted that there are special rules when a corporation primarily earns property income but employees more than 5 full time employees.[^Specified Investment Business] These companies enjoy some of the benefits of earning business income but not all. 

## Business Income ##

In general a business in an *activity* performed in the pursuit of profit rather than a personal endeavour. 

Personal endeavours such as hobbies may not be considered businesses if they are not undertaken in a  commercial manner. In such cases the income earned as a result of the hobby would not be taxable. However, if there is sufficient commercial activity the hobby will be considered a business. 

Also, the CRA may deny losses generated by activities that don't have a reasonable expectation of profit. In order to be considered a business you need to subjectively show that there is a reasonable expectation that the activities will eventually generate a profit. 

## Business Versus Property Income ##

In some cases it will be easy to determine whether income is being earned from a business or from property. In other cases the determination may not be so easy.

The main factor in distinguising business income versus property income is the level of activity involved in generating the income. Property income is earned passively by virtue of owning property while business income is earned by actively engaging in commercial activities. 

### Special Rules for Corporations ###

The distinction between property and business income is more important for corporations than for individuals because there is an additional refundable tax on property income earned in a corporation. This has led the government to include some specific rules to determine the source of income in certain cases:

1. Where the Corporation earns 



For example let's consider a couple examples:

### Cash on Hand ###

A grocery store deposits extra cash in a back account to earn interest. Is the interest earned income from business or property?

It seems reasonable to assert that the interest on the cash is property income since:
1. Cash deposits are property based on the above definition and
2. the income is earned passively

On the other hand, operating a grocery store requires cash on hand to purchase new inventory and pay employees. Therefore holding these cash deposits is integral to the business operations.

In this case, because the property is used for busienss activites the interest earned would be considered business income. However, note if the cash balance increased beyond the needs of the business the source would change to property.










However, it is also easy to argue that this property (the cash deposits) is required to earn business income sicne it

However, there are many situations where the determination between business and property is not so simple. For example:

* I run a grocery store and earn interest on cash in my bank account and short term investments. Is the interest earned considered property income?


# Calculating the Amount of Income #

After identifying the source of the income earned you need to determine the amount of income to report for tax purposes. The calculation of income can become rather complicated depending on your situation. Luckily, if you are employed your employer will provide you with a T4 slip with your income from employment already calculated. Also, if you have passive investments with a financial institution they will provide T5 slips with any dividends or interest you earned in the year. 

However, if you operated a business, employed individuals, acted as an independant contractor or incurred expenses to earn property income then you will need to calculate your income. Refer to the following sections to learn more about calculating income from:

* Employment
* Business or Property 


# Why Distinguish Between Property and Business Income? #

The government of Canada wants to encourage the creation and growth of businesses. New and growing businesses are the driving force behind and growing economy and our increasing standard of living. The government therefore provides certain benefits for taxpayers who are earning business income during the year. Some of these benefits include:

* The Small Business Deduction
* Lower Corporate Tax Rates
* Avoiding certain attribution rules

Since business and property income are taxed differently it is important to determine what type of income was earned during the year



 



[^employment]: Defined in ss. 248(1)
[^business]: Defined in ss. 248(1)
[^property]: Defined in ss. 248(1)
[^Specified Investment Business]: "Specified Investment Business" - Defined in ss. 125(7)



## Benefits of Earning Business Income ##

### Lower Corporate Tax Rates ###

Corporate tax rates in Canada are generally lower than the personal tax rates. This means that it is beneficial to earn income in a corporation and pay a lower tax rate until you take the money out of the corporation. This encourages people to keep money in corporations and reinvest in the business. If you want to read more about this system have a look at the tax integration discussion in the policy section.

However, if you earn property income in a corporation there is an additional tax to eliminate the benefit of earning the income in the corporation versus holding the property directly. The eliminates the ability for people to put their investments in a corporation and deferring tax. 

### Small Business Deduction ###

The government provides a generous deduction for small businesses to reduce their tax burden. This deduction is only available to offset business income. 

### Loss Carryforwards ### 

### Attribution Rules ###


# Impact on Personal Income Taxes #

The personal tax rates are the same no matter what type of income you are earning.

Individuals are taxed on each type of income using the same income tax rates. There are a few considerations to keep in mind such as:

* Office and employment income is subject to EI and CPP payroll taxes in addition to income tax
* Only 50% of capital gain are included in income which results in a large tax savings

Besides the above, the type of income earned by an individual does not impact taxes payable.  

# Impact on Corporate Income Taxes #




# Why Three Sources of Income Instead of One? #

Besides raising money, governments implement taxes in such a way as to achieve certain policy objectives. These objectives include things such as:

* Improving the economy
* Fair taxation
* Collection and administration of tax legislation

These tax policy choices is the main reason that Canada, along with most countries around the world, has such a complex tax system. It is also the same reason that taxpayers can earn income from three different sources, each of which can be taxed differently. 


Income is classified into these different categories in order to help encourage and discourage certain activities in the economy. 








However,
